...concerning
the Vietnam War. In the interest of accumulating
knowledge about the war, I'm going to donate this
tape to the Texas A&M Oral History Collection in
the University Archives. Is this alright with
you? Yes.
When and where were you born? I was born in 1962 at
Saigon, South Vietnam. Do you have any brothers or
sisters? Yes, I do have two brothers. Are they
older, younger? They're younger than me. And are
they here? Yes, they're over here. What are your
memories of the old government, of the Saigon
government? What do you remember about it? Or what
do you remember from people telling you when you
were young, or your own opinions? It's not a very
good government. They just wasting the money.
How do you remember the people being treated?
There's two ways to treat people in Vietnam.
differently
than the school
people. Like, they had all the lectures? Yes. What
did your father do? My father was a teacher. Oh,
like a school teacher? Yeah, he was a philosophy
teacher. Oh, okay. Is he here? Yes, he's over here.
Okay. So, did your whole family come over? Yes, my
whole family. What did
you think of the American soldiers?
Did you know why they were there? I mean, what were
your feelings about them being there? Well, I knew
they were over here to fight, to help us fight the
Communists, but they also bring some very bad
influences without exception. For example?
Like? Like,
uh,
prostitution, drugs. Okay. So,
you say that's why you blame that on the Americans?
You think they started that? Um, uh, in another
way, yeah. Okay. Um, why did your family feel they
had to leave you? Did they feel they had no choice?
Yes, we had no choice. We had to get out because we
cannot live with the comrades anymore. In what
year did you leave? In 1980. How did you escape? We
escaped on a small boat. Was it just your family or
were you with other people? It was a small boat and
it carried 79 people. We
traveled for seven days on the South China Sea. And
when you say a small boat, like... It's about 12
yards long, three yards. And what about food? What
did you eat? The food supplies only lasted for two
days. And the water, I don't remember, it was about
three or four days. But we survived it. when we was
dropped by the pirates. They gave
us some food and water every time. What do you mean
pirates? Like the Thailand, the Thai fishmen. Oh,
okay. They dropped us. I would think that was
pretty scary. Oh, yeah. Can you tell me what you
felt? Maybe you think you were going to make it?
Well, when I left Vietnam, Bessie, Well, I think
that, you know, I'm, I'm dead already. That's
only, in ten, in a hundred percent, I only got ten
percent, you know, five. So I wasn't, yeah. So it's
all or nothing? It's all or nothing, yeah. Um, was
this like all planned out, your escape? Like, was
it?
Yes, it was all playing out because we had to hide it
away from the college. They would bother, they
would put us in jail if they know that we tried to
escape. That just seemed so, I bet you were
paranoid. Yeah, our parents planned it, I just
don't remember. But you knew what they were doing,
right? Yeah.
There was a free
enterprise
restriction in 1978. There's no free enterprise
in Vietnam. Right, right. So what were your living
conditions? They weren't too good, were they? No,
the living condition is bad. How were they
compared to before?
Yes, the communists
control everything.
Rice is the
main food. And they control it. And meat, they
control it. Diarrhea and all kinds of that, they
will control it. They will give us an amount each
month. Ration. Yeah, ration. And I mean, it wasn't
enough. No, it's not. How big is your family? We
have five people in our family. So your parents and
your brothers.
But
you say they've changed a lot since then, your
living conditions. What do you say? No, I didn't
say they changed. Oh, you don't think they've
changed since then? No, I don't think so. It's
still that way. No, I mean now, your own. Not for the
people still in Vietnam. Oh, right now, over here?
Right, uh-huh. I mean, you would usually say you
have it better now? Yes, it's better over here in
the United States and America. When
you
were on the boat, how did you get to America? Were
planning to get to America?
No, we planned to go to Thailand or Malaysia with
our boat because there's some refugee camp over
there. I stayed in refugee camp in Thailand for six
months and then I went to the United States. How did
you get to the United States?
So
you
said
your uncle was your sponsor? How long have you been
here? Since 1935. Oh, okay. What were your first
thoughts of the United States when you got here? So
big. Big? What were you told about the United
States before you even knew you were going to be
here? What were your impressions of it? And
do
you believe that now since you're here? Yes. How
have your thoughts changed over time, like about
America? Do you think it's all what it's made out to
be? You know, when people tell you that you can do
this and you can go for that. You
know, apple pie, you know? Well, my thought hasn't
changed that much. Only that I recognize there's
some limited to the capitalism. Can you explain
further on that? Like if you have too much freedom,
you can see that the crime strike is going up so much
because the prison I didn't get punished. for the
crime that they act, that they commit. So in
Vietnam, they would have gotten? Yes. And I think
I'm against it. I don't know why we put so many
people on the death row, just wasting tax money
to cheat them and have to go through a lot of appeals
and appeals and appeals. I don't know why. Yeah, I
don't understand that either. It makes me mad too.
Yeah. I know exactly what you mean. Yeah. How
have people
treated you since you've been here? Uh, very
nice. Except, you know, one or two occasions that
they've been through, but so far, very nice. Like,
so have you experienced racism? Yes, I have. Would
you say blatantly? Um, about two years ago or so.
What happened? It's, uh, I was working in a
restaurant and
They wouldn't teach you? No, I was working
and they were a customer. Oh, you were working
then? Yeah. And they said something to you? Yeah,
they would all kind of ignore people on the floor.
Oh yeah, that's understand, so you know. Where did
you go to high school? Okay. In
Vietnam,
I went to
a
high school in Vietnam, and over here I went to
Bryan Island. So you came to Dallas when you got
here? Right away? Yes. That's where your uncle
goes? Yes. How were you treated in high school,
among other Canadian students? Pretty nice. You
were? That's great. And so how did you get to A&M?
Yeah,
I'd like to get into engineering too, but I won't do
anything. If you were in Vietnam, do you think
you'd be going to school? No. Engineering degree?
No, no way. No, not at all? Not at all. What do you
think you'd be doing? I don't know. Go out, find a
job, get out of Vietnam as quick as I can. Just to get
out of there, not even stay there. How
are
you treated at A&M? Do you think it's, is it any
different in a college atmosphere? Uh, no. No.
Okay. Um, do you feel people stereotype you since
you are Oriental background? Sometimes. And do
you think so more at A&M on a more of an intellectual
level? Do you think they single you out and
say, oh, you're Oriental and you're so smart and
that's all you ever do is study? Do you feel that?
No. No, I don't. No? What are your thoughts of
Vietnam today when you think about it? Sad. Sad?
Would you ever want to go back? Yeah, I would like to
go back if there was no more communists over there.
Do
you still have friends over there? Yes, I do have
friends over there. Do you keep in touch with them?
Not lately. What's not lately? Well, since about
six months ago, I don't know what happened to them.
All of a sudden? Yeah, all of a sudden they just
stopped. Probably the stamp price went up too
much. When you did correspond
with them, did they say they wanted to leave? You
cannot say it because they will answer on their
own. But did you feel like in their writing that
they probably were not happy? Oh, yes. What do you
think of Americans?
Well, like all the countries, they got good people
and they got bad people. Right. Do you think...
Americans
are forward?
Not really. You think they're just real curious?
Yes, I'm
very curious. Yeah. What do you think of, say,
American women compared to Vietnamese women? Do
you think that... They are more material.
American women? Yeah. But it's not changing. The
second generation of Vietnamese people over here
is... Materialistic as well? They get
Americanized. Okay, that's what I've been
asking. I'm from Austria. And that's where I was
born. And I'm an Austrian citizen. And I've lived
here since I was born. And, you know, people ask me,
you know, why don't you get the American
citizenship? Or why, you know, you're
Americanized too. And I say, well... No, I'm not
American. I'm Americanized. Do you feel you're
Americanized? Or do you feel... No, I think I'm
still... I'm in an old-fashioned way. I'm still
conservative. Conservative? Yeah. But do you
feel you've grown to have more American views
than... Well, I've been Americanized, but not as
much as other people. Like what example? Like
about... What do you think about
women working? Do you think women should work? Or
should stay at home? No, if a husband cannot
support the whole family, the woman should go
ahead and help out. Do you think your views are
different than if you had stayed in Vietnam? Yes,
because in Vietnam usually the husband is
working, the wife is staying home working. Well,
what if you were in Vietnam and
you couldn't support your family? I wouldn't get
married. You wouldn't get married? No. Okay,
interesting. You wouldn't tell
your wife to go get a job? No, I can't. You can't?
It's against the tradition. Okay. Do you want to
say something? Yeah. How have your goals
changed? Or your values? Have they changed at all?
Do you have a feeling that
you could probably go after it and go for more than
if you stayed in Vietnam? I really don't know. What
are your feelings about having
diplomatic
relations
with Vietnam now? Do you think America should and
shouldn't, but not? Yeah, I'm against it. Why?
Well, because you cannot trust communist people.
You know, in front they will say something, but in
the back they will do something else. They will
never keep the promise. But do you think if there
would be diplomatic relations, do you think it
would be a better quality of life for the
Vietnamese people? No. Because if we have
diplomatic relations with the communists, all
the people who we get to benefit from it is the top
people. Who are already getting better. Yeah,
they will get better.
Unless, you know, there's no communists, there's
no way we can do it. What's your opinion of
Gorbachev? Well, he's right now, he got a very big
trouble
because he got the separation of power in the
Politburo. And right now he's trying to eliminate
his opponent. Do you think he means what he says by
his blasphemous and perestroika? Well, he would
show off something, but he would not go at it
completely. He would show the free country and
say,
okay,
I'm going to do that. I'll show you the start, but he
would never finish. I don't really have any more
questions, but you've been here eight years now?
Yeah, eight and a half. And,
I mean, you like it here? It's okay. It's okay?
College Station's okay, or would you rather be
back in... I would rather be back in Vietnam. Oh,
you would? Of course, under different
circumstances. What do you miss the most?
A lot of taste in the air. Like, I'm
sure
you miss your friends, and... That's one thing.
You miss, like, some of the food, or... Well,
food... I don't know, it's just the feeling that
you were born with. Mm-hmm. And, uh, it's never go
away. Mm-hmm. It's still inside you somewhere.
Yeah, it's your home. Yeah. Right, yeah. I don't
even know what to say. Um... Do you want
to
be an American citizen? I am an American citizen.
Oh, you are? All right. Yeah, I got the citizenship
four years ago. Oh. Well, how's that feeling? How
do you feel about it? Well, not very
happy with it. No, because you had to give up your
native language? Yeah, but I think it's good for me
because I can use it to try to do something over here
that I'd be able to do. What
do
you think about
what President Bush, or I guess the election
process here?
Do you think it's more of a kind of personality
election? It takes the people who have the best
personalities and what they really stand for? Or
do you like
the way? What I think is the media controls too
much. The what? The media. The media, oh,
definitely. We get so much information from the
media, so we can never tell the truth. Like, I don't
know, they get good qualifications, but somehow
we get blow up so much. Yeah. You
said you're
engineering,
right? Yes. Are you a graduate student now, or are
you still your undergrad? I'm still undergrad.
And when are you finished? I don't know. I plan to
finish in late 1990. Do you like that? That's a good
idea, isn't it? Yes. You mean you're ready to be
finished? Yes, I'm ready. Did you know you always
wanted to be an engineering major?
Uh, yeah.
I don't know what you're talking about. Yeah, be a
congressman. A politician? Yeah, a politician.
Really? Yeah, I would like to be a congressman.
Really? If I have a chance. Uh-huh. You could go
work in Austin. Work in Austin, you know, in the
capital. Uh, yeah, maybe. Or you already have
bigger... plans to go right to Washington? Oh, no,
no, that's too big.
Oh, okay. But right now I just want to get together
with some groups, Vietnamese groups, and try to do
as much as I can. What do you want to do? What do you
think needs to be done? Why should I vote for you if
you're going to be a politician? What would you say
with your platform? platform is, I'm going to
reform the judicial system over here.
It's a lot of nonsense in there. And I would try to
speed up the... Not let it sit on death row for so
long? Yeah. And I would like to speed up the
bureaucratic movement. Like, you have too many
departments, too many people. You have to go
That's
a lot
of wasting right there. Thank you. I agree with a
lot of you, actually. How would it be looked at in
your culture or in your family if you were to date an
American girl? Or would you even consider that?
Well, I know my family were against it. Do you
consider that interracial? Like some people, you
know, black and white, they're interracial. Some
people are strongly against that. Some people
don't care. Yeah, a lot of Vietnamese people are
like that. To me, it's okay. It doesn't bother you?
No. Would you do that? If I can find the right
person, right girl. I
know I would find one, but I don't know. You're not
looking
for anybody, right? No. Do you have a girlfriend
now? Yes, I do. Vietnamese
culture is a different
culture than American. What would you say is the
biggest difference? That if you did date an
American girl, what would she have to get used to,
do you think? Vietnamese people are more
conservative. Like, they don't like to see a girl
going to the bar and drinking. Oh, so she wouldn't,
she shouldn't do that. Yeah, and they are against.
But you can do that? Can you? Guys, it's okay. Guys,
it's alright. But the girls can't go do it. Well,
no. Well, do you think that's kind of unfair there?
I know. But... You think so? Yeah. Oh, okay. Like,
they are against,
like, pre-marriage,
though, right? Uh-huh. Well, I'm sure that's not
the statement you'd put for a lot of people. So,
would your family be strongly against you? Yeah.
Marrying, or? Do
you have anything else that you just want to say?
No, no. If you have any questions, I'll answer
them. Yeah, I'm trying to think. Do you think
school is tough? No, no. If you put, if you
determine to go get it, you can get it. Do
you want it bad enough? How is the school system in
Vietnam? It's more like a French system. So, like
compared to freshman high school together,
Vietnam with the American, I think the Vietnam
people have more knowledge. Especially math. The
American people
is too, they don't,
they don't
empathize with the mass. I guess, Oriental people
are always looked at to seem like, it seems like
they are very smart and they are very hard workers
in their school work. Are you just brought up from
home? You're going to be doing this so many hours?
We've been doing it in Vietnam. We have class three
days a week. We have class six days a week.
Saturday, too? Yeah, Saturday, too. If I have
physics, I have three days a week and
one hour, two hours every day, two hours each day.
If you have a lesson on Monday, you have to memorize
that lesson to Recite
it
to the teacher. Be ready to recite
it to the teacher on Wednesday. You have to do it
every day like that. So it's getting through your
brain. So you can't get the day, huh? No way. Well,
it's like, keeps you on your feet. Yeah. See, the
homework, we have homework too, but we have to
recite it, what he teaches us. You know, he'll call
me, and then he'll give me. If you don't remember
anything, that's a zero. We have more
competition. At the end of each month, we vote for
who is the best student.
And it's boys and girls in the classroom, right? I
would think it's not as social as I think it is
here in America. No, it's not as social. It's not?
What is it like? What do young people do in Vietnam?
You mean after 75 or before? No, I mean like after
school? After school, they go home and have the
parents out.
Where are your parents now? Are they in Dallas?
And what does your father do now? He's an
electrical technician. And your mother? She's a
tailor. Do you think they've changed since
they've been here? Not very much. Do they still
like to go back to Vietnam?
So,
when you have children,
would you like them to... I would assume that most
likely they'd be born in America, the children,
but would you want them to know Vietnam? Sure, I
would raise them to Vietnamese language. What is
that? Let
them know, you know, try to let them speak
Vietnamese, learn to write, and know about our
culture, our history. Sure, that's important.
Yeah. Well, I think... I don't think there's
anything else. I can't think of anything. Did you
look at other
schools before you came to A&M? No, UT and Rice. And
you didn't like A&M? Rice was too much for me. I
can't afford it. But UT, I don't like it. You don't
like it? How come? I don't know. I just don't know.
No? Too many people? Or just the school? Just the
school. So do you have to pay for school yourself?
Or are you a parent? No, I got a
power bank and I work to support myself. I bet
that's hard though, going to work and school at the
same time. Because I know, I'm an only child and my
parents totally, fully support me. And I have a lot
of friends that work and go to school. And I have a
friend who works and he goes to school. You know, he
has to support himself totally. And I know that
would be really hard. You
know, that's very stressful. Do you think it's a
lot of stress? Yes, it is. It adds. Especially if
you have a family. I know I have a couple friends
that I will marry and try to go to school and support
themselves. Do you have to help out your family at
the same time? No, no.
Okay, it worked.